Dr. Robert Scaer knows trauma.
As a child he experienced many life-altering events,
not the least of which was losing his left eye
after it was pierced with a coat hanger.
He ultimately became a neurologist,
dedicating his life to the alleviation
of pain and suffering.
Dr. Scaer's new book," The Trauma Spectrum:
"Hidden Wounds and Human Resiliency",
states that it's not necessarily big dramas
that shape our life experience,
rather, little everyday traumas that impact
all facets of our daily lives and inner experience.
He says these everyday negative experiences
mold our personalities, choices of partners,
appetites, and much more.
What would you say in terms of percentages
of the population at large have been
traumatized to one degree or another?
100%.
Yes.
Okay, so we'll start from that.
And we'll start with a relatively healthy person,
who isn't day in, day out, experiencing tremors
or traumas or nightmares or anything,
what are some of the normal, run-of-the-mill
types of traumas we experience from birth on?
Let's start with birth.
We can start with birth, we can start
with birth or we can start from the
standard definitional context of trauma,
which misses the boat a lot of times.
Let's start with the
standard definition and tell us why it misses the boat.
The standard definition, of course, evolves
with different editions, it was called the DSM 4,
Diagnostic and Statistic Manual of mental disorders.
But the latest, which is now almost twenty years old,
or is twenty years old, is PTSD, post traumatic
stress disorder, which has specific criteria
for the types of things that would be inclusive
of what a traumatic event is, and it's
quite specific, and then what the symptoms
are allowed to be that would make this definition be good.
So, I'm guessing from what you're saying,
it's a rather narrow band of definitions.
It's a narrow band of definition,
which one has to do in order to do research in the field.
You have to take the bell curve continuum
of life experiences, take a portion of it,
and define that as your entity,
otherwise you can't do research on it.
So, I look at the DSM 4 as an artifact of research.
(laughs) Interesting choice of words.
You were bound to it yourself, being
a practicing M.D.; now, how did you
move beyond that standard understanding?
Well, I was not biased by my training
to depend upon the DSM 4, because I'm
a neurologist, and I came upon the field
of behavioral medicine by serendipitous default
through the work I did in rehabilitation,
which is more of a holistic neurological practice.
And so, I wasn't biased by PTSD, I was at the start,
but as I began to look at the spectrum of symptoms
in patients I knew to be traumatized,
I realized that there was many, many other
expressions of trauma other than
what's described in the book, and
I began to explore that, especially since I
was dealing with what we would call
somatic expressions or manifestations of trauma.
And what does that mean?
The symptoms in the body that
trauma victims experience which are called
somatization disorder, which is another
entirely different spectrum of
description in the DSM 4, that
has nothing to do with trauma.
But in fact, somatization, and prominent
specialists realized this now,
somatization is a huge portion of
the physical experience and expression of trauma,
in the later stages of trauma that go beyond PTSD.
And this is recognized now as what's called
complex trauma, and there's a diagonistic
category called DESNOS, D-E-S-N-O-S, or
Disorders of Extreme Stress Not Otherwise Specified.
Okay, and a lot the work falls into this area.
And much of what really is trauma
falls into that category, and as a result,
we're looking at, I term it as, PTSD
is the tip of the trauma iceberg,
and DESNOS, or complex trauma is the
vast body of experiences that we
all experience related to the cumulative
negative life experiences that we've had.
And most of us, I think,
have come to accept, "Oh, life is
"challenging, it's stressful, yeah, you have your traumas,"
and we think there's not much we can do about it.
Obviously, as we'll discover in this conversation
a lot has changed in that way.
There are modalities of feeling that can be used.
But let's start with birth, let's start with our own births,
I mean, if you've ever witnessed one,
certainly it would seem to be a traumatic event,
and we've all certainly experienced birth.
Right, but it need not be a traumatic event.
I've witnessed birth, I've performed birth,
including on one of my daughters,
and it may be a traumatic event,
depending upon how it's approached
by the person giving birth and by those
who are assisting the birth, and birth,
in fact, is a very natural event, obviously;
it's a event of significant risk,
and a lot of life experiences carry a significant risk.
Let's talk about the classic
Western birth, in the hospital,
and the traumas associated with that,
and then let's look at it through
the other lens in the most natural
possible environment and experience.
Let's do it the reverse; let's
look at the natural and then at the hospital experience,
'cause that will then exemplify.
In a natural birth, the birth has its own progression,
which takes place naturally, and is usually
attended in an optimal setting
by a lot of social support, there will be
other women who assist the birthing mother
in the process, and most, more simpler
societies do this, there are women assistants to the birth,
and often times it's a midwife or woman
assists the birth and births the child.
And in this process, there are rituals that take place,
that assist the mother, there are certain
positions that mother assumes that
are physiologically logical, and in
most societies the woman gives birth squatting.
Because gravity helps, gravity helps.
And this facilitates the birth process,
and after the birth, the infant is put
on the skin, the belly of the mother,
and the infant, and if you've seen
videos of this, will crawl up and
attach itself to a breast, and this
the sort of the usual process of a healthy birth
in a setting that has been in effect for eons.
And this process contains elements
of attachment that are critical to brain development,
including tactiles, touch, stimuli, early nursing.
Early nursing releases oxytocin which causes
the uterus to contract and prevents bleeding.
It also produces a rush of affiliative behavior,
both in the infant and the mother.
When you say affiliative, being?
Affiliative bonding behavior.
There is a mutual conditioned attraction
with this initial release of oxytocin
and actually endorphins, the brain's
pain modulating chemicals, produces
an affiliative response and bonding.
And the skin-to-skin contact is profoundly
important in contributing to that release of oxytocin.
So this process, in its optimal state,
creates, then, this environment between
the mother and child, which is perpetuated
through infancy, in what we call maternal
infant bonding, or attunement, or affiliation,
which has incredibly important neurophysiological
developmental implications, because this bond
stimulates the development of a
part of the brain that regulates the
emotional brain, and the autonomic brain.
And results in a very resilient infant, child, and adult.
They're well-modulated; they have the
systems intact which control excessive
swings of both emotional and autonomic excess.
And it creates autonomic regulation
and emotional regulation throughout the life span.
So this is the optimal birth, that
contains these elements of affiliation.
Let's go to a classic
Western birth in the hospital.
In a hospital birth, and this is evolved
over centuries, actually, but only
in the last 150 years has birth entered the hospital.
And of course, the initial exposure was
to an environment that was full of terrible germs
because the obstetricians or the physicians
would go from the autopsy lab to
the birthing lab with bare hands,
and the syndrome of what's called
puerperal fever, or birth fever,
evolved with about a 60% fatality rate in mothers.
So, clearly, the introduction of an in-hospital
birth created a risky environment,
which gradually was litigated against
by advances in infectious diseases
and the like, but even so, at the
turn of the 20th century, and the
discovery of anesthesia was applied to birth,
and mothers were giving birth with ether
anesthesia, which broke the whole bond.
I was going to say, I mean,
essentially, they were unconscious.
They were unconscious, and that
required the use of instruments, then,
because that interrupted labor, so
the developed instruments to extract
the infant, forceps, so every introduction
of an intervention which was supposedly
for the benefit of the mother and child
resulted in other technological interventions
to compensate for the changing in the
automatic progress of the birth process, and that's
been the history of obstetrics; I'm speaking heresy here.
Well, I know you may be,
considering the fact that you have
governing boards that have governed
your practice throughout your life,
however, looking at the statistics
as time has gone on, especially,
I don't know if you have them,
but in the earlier years when births
started being introduced through the hospitals,
what kind of statistics did you see
in infant mortality side by side
with natural births versus hospital births?
It's hard to get that because
research in natural birth versus hospital births
has been sketchy, and in a country that's
still intervenes with almost all births,
it's very hard to get measurements,
because even a natural birth in a hospital,
is interfered with, generally.
And outcomes and infants have to
do with mortality and morbidity,
meaning physical diseases and damage
and the like, when in fact, perhaps
one of the most important outcomes
is in this process of attunement and
attachment between a mother and infant.
We know that separation of the infant from
the mother, for instance, results in
dramatic changes in the brain.
And in animals, for instance, these changes are for life.
Taking a rat pup away from the mother, the dam,
for one hour will create a lifetime of
autonomic disregulation in the rat pup.
So what happens when
you take the babies away from the mother
in the maternity ward and, as was popular in the 50's,
and think, what, even into the 60's,
breastfeeding was out of vogue for a while,
you don't even bond through breastfeeding
with the mother; what happened to those people?
The same thing happens, now, the time
is proportionate to life span of the individual,
so, one hour with an infant from her mother
is less likely than with a rat,
but nevertheless, removal of the
infant from the mother immediately
after birth to perform the usual rituals
of sticking the heel for blood,
and putting drops in the eyes, and
suctioning the infant, which has no rationale whatsoever,
does result in separation and actually
traumatizes the infant in the process.
So what do you see
as life goes on, what are some of the symptoms
of that kind of trauma as their lives develop then?
The trauma is, basically, in its purest form,
disregulation, meaning, an interruption
in the normal smooth regulatory patterns
of autonomic cycling, which we call homeostasis,
optimal state, of regulatory function
within the brain and body, and that's
what's disrupted, because the part of
the brain that develops and grows
with attunement, regulates that autonomic cycle.
And that brain does not develop
as well if one doesn't have the
early experiences of attunement and bonding.
And of course, anesthesia birth,
a cesarean section drastically disrupts that.
I was just going to ask that,
and people are doing this now voluntarily
so they can have their baby on a Tuesday
or the doctor doesn't have to be
inconvenienced on the weekend,
or choose an astrological sign, all the above.
All those factors, all the above.
Other considerations too.
That's right, other considerations,
so they have something like 30% plus
are now having cesarean births in this country,
something has to be intrinsically wrong with that,
and it has its own traumas; can you
talk about the traumas of cesarean birth?
Well, cesarean birth traumatizes
the mother in that there's invasion in the process,
and that there's pain induced,
which is considerable, requiring
narcotic medication for the mother,
which interferes with her capacity
to attune and bond to the baby.
And as a result, the mother is
inhibited in this process, the instance
of breastfeeding will drastically
go down because the hormonal influences
that stimulate production of milk
are interrupted by this process.
And so, the instance of breastfeeding diminishes greatly.
And the fact that the infant has
to be separated from the mother for a period of time,
the mother's in pain, and holding the infant is painful.
So, you have the
disassociative stuff that goes with
not being able to bond immediately,
that's obvious, anything else with
cesarean births in terms of trauma to the infant?
This is something that's not really been studied,
is the passage through the birth canal traumatic?
Or is it facilitory?
Yeah, my understanding
is that it helps the brain start kicking in
to producing certain amino acids and so forth.
And I think by definition it's facilitory.
In other words, I think that passage is important.
Is it risky?
Well, it may be risky at times,
depending upon the presentation of the infant,
but basically, doctors, obstetricians,
they're no longer trained to do breech births, for instance.
So it's automatically an abnormal
presentation as a trigger for a C-section,
because the skills to perform those
are thought to be archaic and aren't really taught.
Well, it's highly
profitable to have a C-section.
And also it mitigates medical legal liability
if one does a C-section; what we've
found, of course, is that infant
mortality is not helped by C-sections.
Interesting, what do you know about that?
Infant mortality in the United States
is much less than many countries
that do not have invasive birthing procedures.
So, we have not improved on it despite,
electronic fetal monitoring, and
all the techniques that are used,
vacuum extraction, and things of that sort, all of which
are invasive, they haven't improved infant mortality.
They have not improved
in the U.S., very interesting.
But that's, you know, that's sort of
not important to what we're talking about,
what we're talking about is the interruption
of this affiliated bond, which is critical.
And as far as many neuroscientists are concerned,
that is the critical event in one's life
that determines the subsequent vulnerability
to life trauma through the life span.
In other words, that creates more
resiliency than any other factor.
So let's go on to the other factors,
one way or another, we all got here into this world.
Now, let's deal with childhood trauma.
Maybe even, let's kind of chronologically
work our way through, say, childhood abuse.
Childhood abuse, well, the bonding
and attunement is important; childhood
abuse can be multi-varied, in other words,
the presence of an alcoholic parent,
the presence of a parent with mental illness,
or with other chronic illnesses
that would impede their behavior,
in other words, minor adverse life events
during childhood have a significant
effect on the child as an adult.
There's a study, it's called the ACE Study,
Adverse Childhood Events Study,
was done in the 1990's, early 90's,
and it was a long, longitudinal study
with thousands of participants,
and they looked at outcomes as the extremes,
the major causes of death and disease,
and mental illness and addiction
and substance abuse and the like.
And what they found, that there was
a straight-line correlation between
the volume of adverse negative life events,
which are the minor things we're talking about,
and all of the major causes of death,
mental illness, substance abuse, and the like.
So, clearly the brain is shaped in
childhood by what we consider to be trivial life events.
And really, in that first
zero to six year timeframe, which also
affects our physical development,
for example, and what our experience in life is going
to be, not just emotionally but even physically.
Even physically; our diseases are
determined by our early life experience,
which is a shocking finding, and although
that study is well-known, it's not
well-known in the medical literature,
it's in the behavioral literature.
However, there are
enough support groups for children
with alcoholic parents to suggest that
this is fairly prominent in their lives.
Just, certainly point at disturbance.
When we were talking about child abuse,
I was reading in one of your articles
that some of the issues that come
up throughout our lives, as a result
of these early experiences, or even
things like bowel issues and PMS
and fibromyalgia, for example.
Can you talk just a little bit,
'cause I know we've got several more
things to go through, but what happens?
How would you end with PMS issues
or bowel issues or pain issues?
Right, the primary resource behavior
of a child who is facing a threat
or a trauma is to freeze, like the opossum.
Right, frightened, deer in the headlights.
Right, we call it dissociation.
It's a state that we perceive, perhaps,
when we're frozen, like the opossum
or animal who is helpless and has
gone into the numbing them spots.
And little children are helpless.
And that's the only resource a child has,
and for other interests, that's the resource
that most women tend to do for a variety of
genetic and instinctual reasons.
But infants dissociate and freeze,
if they're threatened as a child.
The more they do that, the more
they will do that throughout their life span.
And if they freeze, as a child, a young adult,
an older adult, they will retain
the traumatic experience that caused that freeze response.
And they will progressively tend to freeze
more likely or dissociate, and
be traumatized throughout the life span.
So what we're seeing, then, is that a
early childhood of adverse childhood events
or abuse will result in exquisite
vulnerability to trauma throughout
the life span, and further expanding
expression of that traumatic tendency.
And so, what does that
in effect, do to the nervous system
that will cause all these physical ailments?
When you freeze, you go into a state
that's predominantly parasympathetic.
Now there's a sympathetic fight-flight nervous system,
there's a parasympathetic nervous system
we think of as being energy, restorative, digesting,
resting, and that sort of thing, but in freeze response,
we are in a state of profound parasympathetic dominance.
And in that parasympathetic state of the freeze response,
we have excessive parasympathetic activity
which means the gut is hyperactive,
the excretions of the gut, as stomach acid are excessive,
an example is the soldier who is cowering in the trench,
in a state of terror, they will often
empty their bowels and their bladder,
because they're in this profound parasympathetic state.
And that's a metaphor for many of these
chronic diseases of what I call 'the freeze.'
Fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome,
gastroesophageal reflux disease,
which you see on the TV all the time with Nexium.
It's a societal illness related to the
chronic dissociative traits of our culture.
Stress, and then we enhance
the stress and I've asked many people
I've interviewed this because it's
such a dominant feature of our dietary
patterns in the Western, well, throughout
the world, which is, on top of it,
we jack ourselves up on lots of caffeine.
Now what's that do on top of this, which seems to mimic
all these very things you're talking about?
Well, you gotta remember that
we're dealing with a cyclical syndrome.
It's a sine wave, all of the universe
operates on this cyclical, cycle -
menstrual cycle, the cycles of the moon,
seasons, it's the way the universe
and our body operates, so, you get
both sympathetic and parasympathetic
symptoms within this, and so stress,
which starts the fight-flight response,
will inevitably cycle down into the freeze response,
and once you begin to increase the
volume of cycling, you get both sides of the symptoms.
So you'll treat the depression weak side
with caffeine, which pumps you up,
but then you get too jazzed up.
So then you smoke a cigarette,
which (laughs) brings you down into the relaxation stage.
Or drink some alcohol.
Or alcohol, or benzodiazepines,
Librium, Valium, Xanax, you know?
So what we're doing is we're constantly
battling the extremes of this cycle
through the substances that we
subject ourselves to through our
daily life to make us feel better.
So, is that resulting
in more of the chronic disorders
you're seeing, then, aside from
what we've already experienced in our youth,
we're exacerbating it by our own
intake of these substances?
We have an epidemic of what we call chronic disease.
And allopathic medicine doesn't know
what to do with that, and you'll read this
in many medical articles, we do
great with the acute diseases and
the trauma, the physical trauma,
but we don't know how to treat
these chronic diseases; it's because
we don't have a concept of where they're coming from.
And they're coming from the little
traumas that we expose ourselves to
in this kind of culture, including we are
exposed to in everyday life, and
I write about that, that the trauma
isn't just rape, incest, torture,
terrorism, combat; trauma is any
life stress that occurs in a state of helplessness,
because that is the definition of trauma,
a life threat when one is helpless.
The absence of control defines the state of trauma.
And if you face, for instance, gender discrimination
or racial discrimination, and you are unable
to respond to it in a way that protects you,
that constitutes a trauma.
And my understanding
is that is culturally, not culture-specific,
in that, the female produces considerably
less serotonin than the male in virtually every culture.
Can you speak to that for a moment?
And then I wanna get into a little
bit about the whole sexual issue,
sexual abuse, slash, leading to prostitution and so forth.
Oh yes, recapitulation.
Women are designed, in the face of threat,
to dissociate or freeze; there are
cultural implications from the tribal
examples, and this comes from the work of
Richard Leakey, and a psychologist named Bruce Perry,
and I think it's a compelling theory,
if the children and the women in a tribe
invaded by another hostile tribe,
try to run, try to flee, or fight, they would be killed.
If the men did not fight, they would be killed.
So, women and men and children are
genetically wired to respond differently to a threat,
and women and children are designed to freeze,
because then they are captured if their
tribe is defeated and taken into the
tribe of slaves and contribute to the gene pool.
It's kind of a harsh way to look at it,
but it's the survival instinct.
And it's still translating into
our genetic or our societal factors today.
Right, which probably explains
the three-to-one incidence of women to men
who develop PTSD, the initial syndrome of trauma,
and we tend to develop the disease
as the freeze, fibromyalgia, irritable bowel,
all these predominantly feminine, women syndromes.
Men get them, but with less frequency.
Right, what about the notion of
or the subject of sexual abuse in youth,
and what happens there as a part of that cycle?
As a part of that cycle, again,
the victims are predominantly women,
probably four to one or more, simply
by virtue they are more likely to be victimized.
And the perpetrators are more likely to be male.
That, of course, is a repetitive trauma
of intense degree, both with regards
to the body experiences and also the
terror that's involved with it.
And so the physical and sexual abuse
are probably the most profound
traumas that one can have, also
because they're executed by the caregiver,
the only safe person, and an infant
or a child who is traumatized by a parent,
basically, cannot blame the parent,
because there's nowhere else to flee,
nowhere else to go, and so they
tend to incorporate it as being
a signal of their own deficiency.
And they blame themselves, and
when one asks a trauma victim about that,
they often will say, "No, I didn't have any trauma."
"Well did your mother or father hit you?"
"Oh, yeah," "How often?"
"Every day, but there was no trauma 'cause I deserved it."
I deserved it, I was a bad boy or a bad girl.
So there's a tendency of a child to internalize it, and--
And then how does that
play itself out throughout their lifetimes?
What happens is a phenomenon that is
part of the fact that trauma is a conditioned response.
It's like the dog salivating at the bell,
one learns to respond to threats
with a conditioned response that then
perpetuates itself throughout the life span,
and one will often seek the type
of behavior that one experienced,
even though it was negative, because
that is interpreted as the way things should be.
And so we are attracted, often, to
characteristics in people of the opposite sex
who replicate the behaviors of the caregiver,
including the negative behaviors.
And this produces what's called the
repetition compulsion or traumatic recapitulation -
the tendency to replicate in our choices
the behaviors, experiences, professions,
activities that we experienced as a child
which actually are destructive.
So if you're in a marriage
that has violence at the core, domestic violence,
would you say that in a very large
percentage of those cases where the women
stay in that situation, it's because
they were conditioned to this at an earlier age?
Hundred percent.
Hundred percent, there ya go.
That's why the behavior is so inexplicable,
and why people who care for or support
women of physical abuse are frustrated
by the inability of that woman to leave the environment,
and the tendency to go back into it again.
Because there are rewards systems
in this process; trauma is endorphinergic,
we get a flood of endorphins in our brain,
it helps us to avoid collapsing,
it allows us to pursue the fight and flight response
without feeling the pain, so those
reward systems continue to operate
throughout the lifespan in facing those
kinds of, what we would think would be,
situations we'd try to leave.
What about self-inflicted,
then, harm or trauma to ourselves,
which, we had a little conversation
last night when we were talking about
the ways in which we abuse ourselves.
And one of them that you brought
up, surprisingly, is extreme sports.
I probably would go for extreme anything,
but you say even extreme sports,
what if someone indulges in extreme
sports, what is this indicating?
Well, the sch-war-sh literature
would suggest that they're adrenaline
junkies, they love the adrenaline rush,
what they love is the endorphin rush,
because when you're in an extreme sport
where there is a threat and a danger,
your brain will prepare you for that
by secreting endorphins, because
if you're injured, it will allow you
to continue and complete the act.
That's what soldiers experience,
they're filled with endorphins.
And that's what we're going to next, combat.
Right, combat, combat is an endorphinergic
state, and some soldiers will literally
get addicted to that re-up, continue
to return to the scene of battle because of that process,
and so will an extreme sports enthusiast,
and usually, the ones who do that
are conditioned to do that by virtue
of the fact that's what they did
when they were children, when they were abused.
And there's a high incidence of
early childhood abuse in males
usually abuse by father, both in criminals,
our jails are filled with violence
related to that experience, where
they were rewarded by the endorphins
within the process, and in soldiers
who re-up, and in women victims
of child abuse who continue to
go back to the scene of the crime,
and in sports enthusiasts, who find
that the exposure to the risk produces
this rush of satisfaction.
Even though they're not the ones
on the line, just in observation of it.
And how might this pertain to other
aspects of life other than being in a sporting stadium?
Well, I would maintain that this
reflex, this thing, determines a lot of our social behavior.
This process of seeking endorphin release,
for an experience that otherwise has
links to prior trauma, and I think
it explains a lot of our behavior
including violence in video games,
the rush that one gets with these
kinds of activities, the fact that CSI
is the number one show on TV, which
has these inputs of violent figures
of tissues being disrupted by knives and bullets
with the sucking sounds of the tissue,
it's just absolutely disgusting,
but which is endorphinergic to
those people who find that that relieves anxiety.
So I don't know if you're
willing to go into this particular arena, but,
it's the chicken or the egg, you know, we have a war going.
Now we have a war going.
And now we're becoming junkies for
that kind of news and the images and so forth.
We are, but we are, I think,
a nation of dissociated people.
Number one, we've abandoned childhood
attunement to our birthing methods,
through early childhood abandonment
through daycare before the age of six months,
through two-parent-working family
and people in the audience get very
upset when I say this, and I think
that has created a nation of people
who tend to dissociate in the face of threat,
which we did five years ago, and
we have not come out of that yet.
And as a result, we are very prone
to fear-based control with what
we know to be messages that are
repetitive and aren't saying anything new,
but that unconscious--
They may not even be truthful.
Doesn't matter whether they're
truthful because we are reinforced by
the brain response to that news.
Well, I think we've kinda
tripped through all the areas that create trauma,
how do we get rid of the trauma?
How do we balance that back out again?
We are going to have to make
a great cultural shift to do that.
We can't treat the nation with
individual trauma therapy, we need
to have a change in the perception
of the world as it is with regards
to safety or danger, we need to
change our patterns of behavior within the culture.
Because the institutions of a culture
define the controls that make us helpless.
And if we're helpless, we will continue
to be traumatized by minor negative life events.
So we may need to make a huge cultural shift.
Within the field of treating trauma,
we define methods that work that are
based on all the messages within our
body that trauma produces, and many
of these messages are what we call
somatic or body-based messages,
which are generally ignored by standard psychotherapy.
And when you treat PTSD as the defining
syndrome for trauma, you're missing the boat.
And unless you treat it as this whole
spectrum of events including the
freeze response and the diseases of
trauma that we talked about, you
will never cure the syndrome, you have to change the brain.
Yes, change the brain,
and it seems like there's a very interesting
end roads being made in changing the brain.
We did an interview with Lee Gerdes
in Brain State Technology, and that
certainly seems to be one of the
big breakthroughs and now you're
becoming familiar with Lee's work as well.
Yes, right, that's correct.
Any final thoughts
from your perspective, a lifelong
study of the brain and trauma, of
immediate things we can do as human
beings to stop this chain of events now?
You have, say, a grandchild coming
into the world, what can we effectively
do if you were going to lay it out, you know,
Bob's Rules, one, two, three, four, five,
what are the five things you would
tell those new parents right now?
We need to change the way we
birth and raise our children; we
need to understand that the children
are the ultimate resources in our society,
and that they will be the source we can change.
Because it's gonna be hard to change
all of us, from young adults to my age,
without dramatic treatment, which
I'm going to be exploring in this context
of Brain State Tech, but I think we
need to look at our child-rearing practices
and to do that, we need to change
the culture, value systems that
require a two-parent working family, and we need
to find a way to deal with nurturing the children.
We need to look within the culture
at the norms that we accept as being optimal,
including having the things that we have,
including exposing ourselves to
the entertainment that we have,
and I'm not someone who wants to
turn off violence in the movies,
we need to mitigate it, we need to
look at what it does, we need a shift
in our cultural values, and again,
this has to do with the brain-based
things that I'm talking about,
not just getting rid of pornography
and these kinds of things; we need
to look at the amount of arousal
that we produce in our society.
That we seem to be
upping the bar every year on the
amount of arousal that's required to keep us somehow
tuned in, dialed in, or attentive to our lives.
Exactly.
Yeah, well, this has
been extremely helpful, thank you so much for your time.
Thank you, it's a pleasure.
The good news here is that there
are techniques we can use to help
release our life traumas, which
we will be featuring in the work of David Berceli,
Dr. Scaer has also created an alliance
with Lee Gerdes, stating that Brain State
Technologies offers a major piece
of the puzzle in reestablishing
equilibrium in our lives; for more on that,
take a look at our interview with Lee Gerdes.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(relaxing music)